[Music]
in the early 20th century a man named
Martin Ramirez left his life in Mexico
behind seeking opportunity across the
border in the United States but fate had
a different path in store for him
diagnosed as a catatonic schizophrenic
Martin spent most of his adult life
confined within the walls of
Institutions yet within those walls WS a
unique artistic voice emerged using
scraps of discarded materials Martin
Ramirez built a world of his own a world
filled with Fantastical shapes religious
iconography and memories of his
homeland in this video we explore the
remarkable life and art of Martin
Ramirez a self-taught genius who found
solace and expression in the most
unimaginable
places if you're new to this channel a
warm welcome to to you and if You' not
done so already please be sure to
subscribe and click the notification
Bell to see more videos from me on the
weird and wonderful side of the art
World I'd also like to quickly thank
better help for being the pay partner of
today's video it goes without saying
considering the kind of art I've covered
on this channel so far that art can be a
beautifully creative outlet for
improving our mental well-being
sometimes putting our incredibly
dominating complicated and complex
emotions and thoughts onto paper helps
many people out there paint a clearer
picture quite literally in order for us
to face or come to terms with our inner
demons but sometimes we need an extra
helping hand to guide us through the
bleakest or most stressful of times and
while therapy can help many individuals
out there it's not always affordable
which is why better help can be a
perfect solution now I'm someone who has
battled through many bouts of anxiety
over the years um especially social
anxiety to a point where the thought of
visiting a new therapist would just be
devastating to me but better help has
those exact concerns in mind they offer
you the chance to connect with a
therapist from the safety of your own
home making the whole process far less
intimidating the choice of speaking to
your therapist by phone by messaging or
by video call is entirely up to you you
can even schedule an appointment when
it's convenient for you when you get
started you'll be offered a question
questionaire to fill out that can tailor
your specific needs and requirements to
an experienced therapist that is perfect
for you usually within just 48 hours you
can even switch therapists in your
settings at no additional costs should
you feel the therapist isn't quite right
for you by clicking a link in the below
description or choosing the code blind
dweller during sign up you can get
started taking back control of your
mental health and work towards living a
much happier life alongside 4 million
people around the world and you can
enjoy a special discount on your first
month thank you again to better help for
being a pay partner on this video and
with that said welcome to another video
my friends this is the story and artwork
of Martin Ramirez
[Music]
Martin Ramirez was born on the 30th of
January 1895 into pedan within the
central Mexican state of
Jalisco most of Ramirez's early life
remains shrouded in some mystery on May
31st 1918 he married 17-year-old Maria
Santa Ana Navaro Basquez after
relocating to TT the couple gave birth
to their three daughters Joanna tioa and
Austina and Ramirez bought a small piece
of land on credit in a ranch near San
Jose De
Gracia by 1925 however Ramirez set his
sight to the neighboring land of
opportunity in the United States leaving
his three daughters and his wife
pregnant with his soon Tobe born only
son to work on the California railroads
to earn more money to support his
family this decision would lead to many
unfortunate circumstances later down the
line as conflict in his home country was
reaching breaking points in the wake of
the cero war that ultimately would
separate him from his
family by the start of the 1930s Ramirez
found himself cut off from both his
family and the entire world around him
eventually ending up unemployed and
homeless within a country of which he
could hardly speak the language
spiraling into a terrible battle with
his mental health whilst living on the
streets on January 9th
1931 Ramirez was picked up by the San
Wen County California police and
committed to Stockton State Hospital
where he received a preliminary
diagnosis of manic
depression after escaping the hospital
twice within the 2 years that followed
he was committed to the hospital again
after a few days in jail and diagnosed
with a catatonic form of dementia
precox he would even Escape Stockton a
third time by 1934 but returned of his
own valtion after spending three or 4
days on the
streets however it would be during these
institutionalized years that his
artistic talent began to emerge using
whatever materials he could find
including scraps of paper scavenged
pencils crayons cardboard and even
potato paste mixed with his saliva he
began recreating his memories within
large scale drawings and
collages a turning point came in 1948
when Ramirez was transferred to the dit
state hospital near
Sacramento it was here where a visiting
psychology Professor Tomo Pasto
recognized the Brilliance in Ramirez's
work Pasto began collecting and
preserving Ramirez's Creations many of
which were sprawling narratives filled
with Fantastical imagery religious
figures and autobiographical
references over the course of his life
Ramirez produced some 500 Works
characteristic for their clean yet
Brazen
draftsmanship the imagery is both
suggestive and nostalgic often
reminiscent of his own life experiences
Mexican madonas animals Cowboys trains
and Landscapes merge with the scenes of
American culture and create a profound
documentation of a Mexican living and
working in the United
States despite pasto's efforts Ramirez
remained largely unknown during his
lifetime exhibiting his work in small
exhibitions as early as the
1950s it wasn't until the 70s long after
his death in
1963 that his work gained wider
attention artists Jim nut and Gladis
Nelson along with the art dealer Phyllis
kind championed Ramirez's art organizing
larger exhibitions and acquiring a
significant portion of his
collection since then Ramirez's work has
been celebrated for its raw honesty
mesmerizing patterns and captivating
imagery he is considered to be a master
of self-taught artists of the 20th
century his legacy a testament to the
power of human creativity that can
flourish even in the most challenging
circumstances with a mind so
relentlessly Disturbed
[Music]
the first work I'd like us to explore is
unofficially titled Courtyard completed
by Ramirez in
1954 unofficial because from what I
understand most if not all of his pieces
were all left Untitled and this will be
the case for all of the work we'll be
taking a look at in this
video in the midst of all of these
Strangely Beautiful geometric patterns
the first thing that tends to grab the
eye is a central figure with an
Indescribable expression on their face
emerging from some kind of portal in a
canyon of tunnel-like
arches this placement suggests a place
of sanctuary a refuge within the artwork
itself the religious iconography could
hold personal significance for Ramirez
perhaps it reflects a source of Solace
and stability within the conf findes of
the Asylum a place where Familiar
religious imagery provided
Comfort flanking the central figure are
intriguing animal forms these creatures
might represent a connection to the
Natural World a stark contrast of a
structured environments of the
Asylum the presence could symbolize a
yearning for Freedom a desire to escape
the constraints of
institutionalization and reconnect with
the openness and simplicity of nature
looming large in the upper portion of
the artwork is a train and its tracks
trains were a recurring Motif in
Ramirez's work likely a powerful memory
from his past working on the California
railroad here the train might symbolize
a bygone era a time of freedom and
movement that stands in stark contrast
to its current
circumstances the Relentless repetition
of the train tracks could also be
interpreted as a representation of the
structured routine and repetitive nature
of life within the Asylum as we will
come to see in other examples of his
work this entire scene is brimming with
intricate and repetitive patterns and a
Relentless use of horizontal and
parallel lines while some may interpret
this repetition as a symptom of his
schizophrenia it could also be seen as a
form of artistic compulsion and a method
of creating order within his world
these patterns might also function as a
form of personal expression a visual
language Ramirez developed to
communicate his inner
experiences while some of his Works seem
to have explored the inner world of
Ramirez others would symbolize his
memories experiences and upbringing such
as this next work that bears The
Unofficial title of cabalero with women
completed in
1953 we're greeted Again by a frame of
repetitive lines that create The Surreal
stage for our Central figures here this
also introduces us to another element of
Ramirez's use of collage in particular
the woman on the left armed with a gun I
managed to come across an exhibition
pamphlet online courtesy of a folkart
museum in New York which uncovers a
great deal of information on his
individual pieces including this one
especially in regards to what these
figures symbolize I've also left a link
for this in the description below if you
want to take a look for yourself
according to the pamphlet the
significance of the rider on the horse
proudly holding his pistol is best
explained by Martin Ramirez's oldest
daughter xanna who explains her father
used to say that having a good horse and
a good pistol would make a man happy as
these were considered to be two very
important symbols of masculinity and
social status among the rural poor of
the Rancho Society where he lived until
he was 30 years old it was also reported
that Ramirez was an excellent Rider of
his bay horse the small drawings that
Ramirez sent back to his family with his
letters before he was interned in the
first mental hospital were mainly of
horses
Riders though the layers behind this
symbolism don't stop there Ramirez's
biography suggests that his Riders had
an intimate connection to the chero
Rebellion that took place between 1926
and
1929 this conflict between armed
Catholic Rebels and the secular
government of Mexico had devastating
effects on Ramirez's family and on the
lives of other rural impoverished
families from Los Altos D Jalisco which
was the central area of a
Revolt the federal army forced fields to
be abandoned and thousands of families
including Ramirez's own to leave behind
all their belongings and concentrate in
the biggest
towns but the reality of this conflict
escalated Beyond eviction of locals the
Army also took possession of all
remaining crops in the countryside set
pastures and Fields on fire and turned
their machine guns on any cattle or
animals that they could not take away by
train all religious acts and processions
were suspended the churches were closed
and later plundered and used as Stables
by the government's
troops this situation must have seemed
nothing short of apocalyptic for Ramirez
he once even received a letter from his
brother explaining how he had only been
able to escape execution thanks to
Ramirez's wife and a friend his brother
also wrote about the destruction of
Ramirez his property and the loss of all
his animals after a long wait Ramirez
sent a letter back to his brother
telling him he was not coming home to
Jalisco this letter made it clear to his
family that Ramirez had completely
misunderstood his brother's letter and
mistakenly believed that his wife in
absence had abandoned her duties as
mother and wife and left her family to
ride off on Horseback to fight with the
federal army against the cheros
[Music]
next I'd like us to take a closer look
at Martin Ramirez's use of collage
specifically within his Untitled piece
completed in 1952 showing again how
Ramirez would often create Arts with
whatever materials he had available
within such a restrictive environment
surrounded by the thick walls of a
mental hospital the situation for many
patients must have been prison-like
exchanges with the outside were
drastically reduced and made exclusively
through third parties such as Ward
attendance psychiatrists visitors and
sometimes books and
magazines just like a DJ or a music
producer uses other tracks as quaries to
give form to new ideas collage Arts
functions in a very Sim similar way
whether you call it collage cut and
paste or sampling the practice of
reusing recovering or repurposing
remains a fascinating process which
Ramirez does very beautifully here as
the folk art museum explains quote the
female Rider enthusiastically welcomes
the varial engineer leaning out of a
window of his powerful and impressive
locomotive it is a concentrated image of
desire and a possibly Amorous encounter
at the same time we Face a
representation via an erotic setting of
The mythologized Clash of the Wild and
the authentic West represented here by
the woman with the strength of the
modern machine age represented here by
the train Ramirez picked up this cliche
and in transferring it into his collage
transformed its meaning into the
opposite there is an obvious contrast
between his stylish illustration of the
woman on the one hand and Ramirez's
simple and delightful completion of a
horse and the rough hatching on the
borders this contrast becomes even more
acute when one recalls the conditions
under which the collage was produced
Ramirez had cut off all contact with his
family in Mexico and remains in
California he ended up confined to a
mental Asylum knowing that never again
would he be on a train back home thus
this cheerful image of a glamorous en
counter turns into a metaphor for
longing and loss end
[Music]
quote this next piece unofficially
titled Madonna is an intriguing addition
to his body of work this in fact would
just be one example of many Works
depicting the image of the Madonna which
is linked to a very Dee rooted cultural
signific ific an the representation of a
Madonna is very common in Mexican
religious art and popular expression
whether for institutional domestic or
personal use virgins depicted in many
forms abound in paintings sculptures ex
votos prints medals and even tattoos on
the skin Roman Catholicism in Mexico is
a fusion of indigenous and European
belief systems and traditions depending
on ethnicity cultural region social
class and Rural or Urban context Mexican
culture articulates this Fusion
dynamically as we know Ramirez created
art in a very restrictive environment
with barely any adequate materials it is
said he often worked on the floor of his
Hospital Ward choosing a studio Space
barded by two twin beds and a
nightstand the artists collected a
variety of papers such as discarded
nurses notes magazines
newspapers book pages flattened paper
cups and examining table cover sheets
and Glu them together with homemade
adfs his glue recipe included potato
starch bread dough and saliva it was
only later after his work began to
Garner notice that art supplies were
given to him by Dr Pasto and Hospital
staff Ramirez then collected crayons
color pencils water-based paints and
Poss also shoe polish and fruit juices
then crushed these materials into a
liquid medium that he mixed into a
homemade
pot rather than use a brush he used a
match stick as his form of stylus and
for a straight edge he used a tongue
depressor when it came to his larger
scale work such as the Madonna piece
we're looking at now he would stand on a
table to evaluate his artwork laid out
on the floor from an appropriate
distance across the work we can see
Blobs of swirling lines that almost
resemble large fingerprint
Contours the lines have nearly perfect
spacing indicating a sense of order that
Ramirez forcibly brings to the scene as
well as a Clarity and sense of control
over the direction of his artistic
expression while it might seem unlikely
Ramirez did have an audience artist
Wayne tabal remembers visiting him with
art classes from a nearby College and
would recount his experience quote I met
him and watched him work he used little
prototypes he would roll up and put in
his jacket to copy like a foot or a head
or a train or a Horse and Rider it seems
he had a kind of series of little
characters that he would bring on stage
almost like a repitor company he pasted
papers together with a mixture of breads
from the mes hle and his saliva and
would past together all kinds of bits of
material of all sorts of paper he could
find end
quote in this other example of a Madonna
completed between 1950 and 1953 Ramirez
executes this piece in a similarly
rustic setting except this time we're
given subtle imagery of a setting which
resembles a chapel within a church or
Shrine in a workplace or home this style
may be related to prints or tar Jettas
common templates for artists with no
formal training
dressed in a robe with Hues of celestial
blue the Virgin stands on a tripod that
resembles a traditional mil jet around
volcanic rock artifact and common tool
used since pre-colombian times to grind
chilies and spices for
sources it form asserts the shape of the
Moon rhythmically underlining the
architectural setting are branches of
Lies the flowers are always accompanied
the Virgin symbolizing Purity and
simplicity
feathers also hold a symbolic purpose
worth mentioning here feathers were
sacred material used only by the highest
abbility by Warriors and in the ritual
attire linked to
deities feathers were so valuable that
they were also used as materials to pay
tribute in early colonial Mexican art
indigenous artists use feathers to make
Mosaic paintings as gift for popes
Emperors and so on but while the Madonna
image was frequent in his work with some
examples being closely connected to an
iconographic tradition some were also
reimagined and altered to align with
Ramirez's own creativity such as this
next example completed in
1950 placed in an impressive Niche
framed by Garland of stylized flowers
and surrounded by a finely built Arch a
woman with blue eyes is looking at us
her hands folded as if to pray at first
glance we presume we is standing in
front of a Madonna but things become
less obvious the closer we look for
example she has blond's hair which for a
Madonna depiction is extremely uncommon
she wears a festive but slightly fancy
shirt with red stripes and her skirt is
simple but
elegant behind her we can see a blue sky
dotted with flowerlike
stars this ignites many questions
surrounding the meaning behind this
example is she standing is she praying
is she laid out as at awake or on the
contrary very much alive is she a
majestic Madonna or a beautiful American
woman decorated with the Stars and
Stripes could it be that Ramirez was
paying homage to a loved one sadly these
are all questions that will likely be
left unanswered and left to
interpretation yet what this drawing
clearly shows is how Ramirez proceeded
in his art making he based his work on
an established and highly popular model
but adapted it to fit his own personal
purposes bear in mind that this kind of
technique is something pretty impressive
for an untrained artists to achieve and
to learn on their
[Music]
own this next piece is a personal
favorite of mine and also one of the
most mysterious pieces in his body of
work with the unofficial title of skele
it's mysterious not just because of its
unknown completion date but also the
appearance of a skeleton which to anyone
outside of Mexico such as myself first
gives off a very grim and Eerie
sensation however to Mexicans the image
of skeletons and skulls hold a much
deeper and more beautifully profound
meaning here Ramirez depicts a skeleton
playing music which is believed to be a
homage to the ancient tradition of Daner
d moete or Dance of Death established in
the 14th century it was widely popular
as a representation of the absolute
power of death over human life in
contemporary United States and Europe
the dance of death was gradually
replaced by The Cult of the Eternal
Youth and paradoxically found its new
home in youth
subculture in Mexico the dancer Dam as
imported by the Spanish conquerors met
with the Aztec culture and its Cults
this led to a new tradition that found
its annual peak in the well-known Day of
the Dead where life and death meet in a
festive and almost celebratory Gathering
where death is not faced with fear and
anguish but instead acknowledged as a
natural part of life and treated with
light-hearted acceptance and even
humor in the lower part of his drawing
we see a condensed representation of
everyday life cars houses streets and
Hills whatever happens the road takes us
upward Terrace after Terrace year after
year to meet with the Last Dance it
seems that Ramirez is betraying death as
waiting for us at the summit but it is
always present playing its songs on its
fiddle sometimes in the background
sometimes far away but as always in the
end very
close it's hard to say what exactly
inspired this imagery perhaps Ramirez
was simply once again betraying his
culture as a sign of reverence or
respect or perhaps for whatever reason
he was becoming ever more conscious of
death's presence and was prompted to
create this drawing but regardless it
serves as a useful reminder that death
is always present no matter how much we
try to ignore it but it shouldn't be
regarded as negative or depressing to be
conscious of how precious and short our
life is can potentially make our lives
so much more meaningful and
compassionate although often branded
with a label of an outsider artist his
work offers a front row seat view into a
unique visual language one that blends
cultural memory personal struggle and an
undeniable artistic
impulse his phenetic lines and
reoccurring motifs I think are really
captivating prompting reflection on
themes of displacement resilience and
the enduring human spirit Spirit while
the circumstances surrounding his art
are undeniably tragic Ramirez's Legacy
lies in the undeniable power of His
Creations his work stands as a testament
of a transformative potential of Art in
spite of immense
adversity Martin Ramirez may have been
an outsider to the traditional art world
but within his artistic Universe he
found a voice of profound Beauty and
enduring significance that is truly
noteworthy
in one way or another he found his
freedom through the confines of a
hospital walls through creativity and
Imagination that not even his crippling
mental health could take away from
him thanks for watching everyone I hope
you found this video interesting and I
hope you found some inspiration through
the works of Martin
Ramirez before I end this video I'd like
to quickly share some artwork sent to me
by one of my viewers for my end of video
feature artist corner and today's
featured artist is David asedo born in
Puerto Rico in
1975 David's pictorial work is
recognizable by the bold colors textures
and
compositions David has created imagery
attributed to his silent resistance to
Conformity and established stereotypes
and draws from his roots in Puerto Rico
and social
themes a notable part of his depictions
is a hidden message or symbols in his
work drawing a viewer into each piece
and creating Intrigue the work David
produces ranges from vibrant pop art
expressionist art and
Abstract he is exhibited in the United
States Spain and Hong Kong in China
winning the title of visual artist of
the year in 2009 and a golf Shor Life
magazine Awards in 2016 for his
Community work in diversity and
inclusion David's use of color his
surreal Landscapes and jarring imagery
is such a joy to explore there are so
many layers to his work and hidden
messages in nearly every corner of each
painting his skill alone is clear to see
but is also accompanied by his
extraordinary imagination which
completes his
Creations I'm also very impressed by
sculptures which again are just glowing
with color drawing me in like a moth to
a light bulb so I want you to do me a
massive favor and check out his website
to see more please click the link you
see on screen that I put in the video
description below if you're an artist
watching and potentially would like to
be feature in one of my videos as well
let's get talking please send me an
email to Blind dweller gmail.com or give
me a message on Instagram I've not been
so active on there recently I'm sad to
say because as I'm getting older I'm
just getting more and more sick of
social media to be quite honest with you
but occasionally I like to check in I
also have a Discord server called Blind
dwellers Art Club I don't accept
submissions there but I like to check in
and say hi every so often for example I
have a channel for asking me a question
so if you want to introduce yourself
please feel free it' be great to meet
you and it's a great place to share your
artwork get some tips from other artists
and so
on finally a huge thank you to all of my
patrons and channel members here's a
shout out to all of my top paying
donators Lori Gallardo Port perea mil Z
grape Vlad Z Tyler Butler Eric Lam
marker Dave
MC molotto Reverend lizard skin the new
Ono 24
eok kmbi Leaf flowers Calvin k
[Music]
Aisa Carol H and Charlie
sanesi that's all for me today see you
in the next one soon keep being creative
and bye for now